---
layout: post
title: "Generics in Scala: Upper and Lower Bound"
categories:
  - scala
  - programming language
tags:
  - Scala
  - programming language
  - java
  - jvm
  - java virtual machine
  - spark
featured-img: scala
slug: scala-V
date: 2020-11-11T20:25:52+00:00
---

*"This post is also known as “My saga learning Scala - Part 5"*

<!--more-->

[Part 1 - Why am I learning Scala and resources](https://leportella.com/scala-i/)

[Part 2 - Functions and Strings](https://leportella.com/scala-ii/)

[Part 3 - Classes in Scala: method and attribute definition](https://leportella.com/scala-iii/)

[Part 4 - Classes, Objects and Traits in Scala](https://leportella.com/scala-iv/)

As I said on the last post, Generics was a bummer and I got super demotivated. But after finding myself a mentor (thanks, Aaron Levin <3) and a bit more of study I figured out one of the complicated parts of this concept: the upper and lower bounds. Hope this makes it easier for you than it was for me 😉

---

## Brief overview on Generics

Whenever I create a new class, I need to define the type of its parameters, so you are bounded to a specific type. 

Take a look on the following class. Its unique function can only receive an `Integer`, regardless if the function can receive a `String` just as well. This is possible because the `println` will go to the method `.toString` that is implemented in the `Integer` class. But because `.toString` works in any class... this function could actually work with any class.

```scala
class NonGenericClass {
    def myFunction(param: Integer): Unit = {
      println(s"This was the param: ${param}")
    }
}

val instance = new NonGenericClass
instance.myFunction(1)
// This was the param: 1
```

Instead of being bounded to a single type we can make the class *Generic* by adding a `[]` with any value (such as `T`) to represent that this generic class will only define a type when it is instantiated: 

```scala
class GenericClass[T] {
    def myFunction(param: T): Unit = {
      println(s"The param was: ${param}")
    }
  }
```

What this means is that this random letter will later be replaced by a class that will define and bound the type to the class. So, for instance, we can say that we want the same class to work with an integer:

```scala
val aIntegerClass = new GenericClass[Integer]
aIntegerClass.myFunction(2)
// The param was: 2
```

Or a String:

```scala
val aStringClass = new GenericClass[String]
aStringClass.myFunction("A String")
// The param was: A String
```

Or a Double:

```scala
val aDoubleClass = new GenericClass[Double]
aDoubleClass.myFunction(1.23)
// The param was: 1.23
```

You get the idea! In the case of our class, as long as the class has a `.toString` method implemented, it will work. Let's override the method in a new class, so we can see the effect:

```scala
class AnyClass {
  override def toString = "any class can override this method!"
}

val overridingToString = new GenericClass[AnyClass]
overridingToString.myFunction(new AnyClass)
// The param was: any class can override this method!
```

The code above works well because all classes in Scala have a method `.toString`. What would happen if they didn't? 

## Upper Bound: your safe guard on generics

Let's say I want to create a class called `Order` that will create a new order for each person on a restaurant. The `Order` class will have a method, called `getMeal`, that checks if someone is vegetarian or not. Depending on the preferences it will return a specific meal.

To do this we will accept any class as a `person` in a new `Order` request. The restriction we have here is that the `Person` class have to have a method called `eatsMeat`.

You can imagine something like this:

```scala
// doesn't work
class Order[T](val person: T) {
  def getMeal: String = if (person.eatsMeat) "meet burguer" else "veg burguer"
}
```

The problem is that `T` can be *any* class. At this point we can't guarantee that `T` will have a method `eatsMeat`. That is why the above code won't work. If you try to compile it you will get the following error:

```scala
Error: value eatsMeat is not a member of type parameter T
```

So we need to make sure that T will *always* have the method `eatsMeat`.

---

We know that we have an `abstract class Human`, and `Human` is an abstract class that *requires* their subclasses to implement the `.eatsMeat` method:

```scala
abstract class Human {
  def eatsMeat: Boolean
}
```

So we know that any class that extends `Human` is good enough to be used as the `T` class we defined before. 

The way we declare it is like this:

```scala
T <: Human // T is a subtype of Human
```

By doing that, our code will work but it will only accept classes that extends `Human`, thus, we guaranteed that they will always have the `eatsMeat` method.

```scala
// works
class Order[T <: Human](val person: T) {
  def getMeal: String = if (person.eatsMeat) "meet burguer" else "veg burguer"
}
```

Let's imagine we have two classes and that both that inherits from `Human`:

```scala
class Adult(val vegetarian: Boolean) extends Human {
  override def eatsMeat: Boolean = !vegetarian
}
class Child(val vegetarian: Boolean) extends Human {
  override def eatsMeat: Boolean = !vegetarian
}

val jimmy = new Adult(true)
val marie = new Child(false)
```

We can now get meal for a vegetarian Jimmy and non vegetarian Marie:

```scala
val jimmyOrder = new Order(jimmy)
println(jimmyOrder.getMeal)
// "veg burguer"

val marieOrder = new Order(marie)
println(marieOrder.getMeal)
// "beef burguer"
```

This declaration `T <: Human` is called a **Upper Bound** which means that *T is a subtype of Human*. 

## Lower Bound: well.... they exist

If we needed the opposite, we can do `T >: Human` . This define that `Human` is a subtype of `T`. 

In our restaurant we know that vegans should only eat vegan food while vegetarians will be happy eating both vegan or vegetarian food. We can also assume that ominivores will eat all types of food. That could be expressed like this:

```scala
class Vegan
class Vegetarian extends Vegan
class Ominivore extends Vegetarian
```

Ok, great! So If I am a vegetarian, I want my order to include either vegan or vegetarian but not meat. We could do that by defined a lower bound type:

```scala
class Order[T >: Vegetarian](meal: T)
```

This will allow this:

```scala
val firstOrder = new Order[Vegan](new Vegan)
val secondOrder = new Order[Vegetarian](new Vegetarian)
```

But not this:

```scala
val failOrder = new Order[Ominivore](new Ominivore) // doesn't work
```

I know the example explains but doesn't show a real example. I couldn't find a real use case in the examples I've seen. [This post about Bound Types says the following](https://www.bradcypert.com/upper-and-lower-bounds-in-scala/):

- *The practical use cases for a Lower Type Bound are few and far between, but there certainly are some cases where it makes sense — just don’t expect to see them in every Scala codebase.*

So I decided not to consume myself more with this and hopefully it will all make more sense whenever I see this concepts in "real life"

---

Ok! Hope you liked this post! Let me know if you are reading this and want a Part 6!
